.. Kenneth Lee 版权所有 2017-2019

:Authors: Kenneth Lee
:Version: 1.0

Understand Chinese -- Da De Jing Introduction
***********************************************

This is an introduction about Dao De Jing to some of my friends who speak
English.

Dao De Jing is the core culture and philosophy of Chinese. If you don't
understand Dao De Jing, you will never understand Chinese or Chinese Culture.
I believe you will accept this after you read my text.

Dao De Jing is a famous book (or paper?) written 2500 years ago. We believe it
was written by Laozi. But who know, many thing was lost in the river of the
history. But anyway, almost every phrase of Dao De Jing is an idiom for
Chinese. It is part of the DNA of Chinese culture. As a Chinese, he/she may
not know they come from Dao De Jing, but he/she just use it. He may not
understand or accept the idea of Dao De Jing. But they follow the pattern
defined in it. You will understand what I mean after you read my text.

My English is quite limit. But fortunately, Dao De Jing is written in original
Chinese character. It makes use of the original meaning of words. I don't need
to know high level English culture and philosophy to explain to you and you
don't need Chinese background either.


Understand "Dao"
================

You may have already heard about "Dao" in other text which talks about Chinese
culture. In many of this text, "Dao" is linked to some mysterious stuff, such
as "Qi" or "Spirit". But the original meaning of Dao is quite simple. "Dao"
means route or way. A route or a way can lead you to the destination. So "Dao"
is used to refer to the reality or the best way to achieve a goal. We don't
really know how the reality is going to happen. But we do see its pattern by
watching the track of how things happen. We saw it again and again. But when
we try to catch it, it just moves away in the last minute.

Dao De Jing try to explain why. As its first sentence, it says "道可道，非常道
。名可名，非常名"。If I translate it word by word directly, it says "Dao can
be Dao-ed, but it is not the general Dao. Name can be named, but it is not the
general Name".

Laozi explains that Dao can be caught. But it is not in the way you expect.
The major reason is the name. We talk about something or even we think about
something with names. But names are just names, they are not Dao. From the
very beginning, maybe they match Dao. But when thing move on, Dao will leave
it.

When you name something is good. Everything try to be good. Many good is no
good. Good "Dao" will leave the name "good".

We may be aware that name is not Dao. But we may not be aware that name even
not name the major part of Dao. Name is just naming the "problem" of Dao. When
we say something "good", it is just because there is something "bad". We say
something "long", it is just because there is something "short"(and cannot
fulfill your requirement). If everything is "good", the name is not there. So
there is a big part of Dao exist, but you don't name it. Therefore you may not
even be aware of it. Name is not the way to solve the problem. The name itself
is the problem. Being is another name of Non-being.

Laozi give an example, he says: When the system leave Dao, you see (or are
aware of) good. When the system leave good, you see "very good". When the
system leave very good, you see "very very good". In a real good system,
everybody take their own position, nobody is "good", they just do their own
duty. If you see somebody is "good", it means there is something really bad
happening. People should try to solve the problem, not try to make good "very
good". "Bad" is the reason of "Good". Name is the problem itself.

We can never talk or think of Dao without name. But we have to know they are
just names. And when you make the name public, people will try to redefine the
name to make sure they themselves are in the positive part of the name. So Dao
will then leave the name. You cannot reach Dao by this way.

The reader may have be aware why Dao is linked to the mysterious stuff. Not
everybody can feel Dao through names. They cheat or persuade others or
themselves they are naming the Dao. But they just lost the track of Dao and
are bound to the name.

Name is a trap when you try to catch Dao. To avoid the trap, Laozi said you
should catch the problem behind the name. You should dig out the parent of the
name until you find the original problem of the name itself. So don't believe
any "theory". Theory is the flower of names. It looks beautiful. But it is a
trap to drag you out of the track of Dao. Try to do something help to solve
the problem, don't try to fix the problem by arguing on or redefining the
name.

So now you know Dao De Jing is not a book about a theory to ask you to
believe. Dao De Jing is a book to tell you not to believe and keep track of
Dao.

It is a theory of non-theory. Yes, it is still a theory, but you catch only
its name as soon as you take it as a theory:)


Understand De
=============

Dao De Jing is talking about Dao and De. (Jing means a classical book. For
example, We call Bible as Sr. Jing in Chinese.)

After explaining the non-theory of Dao, Laozi also explained how to use it.
Dao De Jing is a book written to the King. Laozi told how to be a good King.
He gave another name to name this kind of King. He called him Sheng Ren, which
can be understood literally as "The best of all". I will call him the ONE in
this blog.

The ONE may not be the King finally. It can be anyone who intends to follow
Dao and reach his/her destination.

The ONE own the country, or the organization, or the team. But wait, what is
"own"? You have a gun with 6 bullets in your pocket. Do you own the gun?
"Yes!" maybe you would declare: "I bought it from the shop with my own money.
And I'd also got a license from the government." But can you prove it is
really yours? OK, now you draw it out and shoot. Maybe you think every shot
prove you really own the gun. But after that, do you still "own" it?

"Own" is just a "name"! It is your burden rather than your benefit in some
way. It won't help you very much. If you be the King, is it you who own the
gun or your soldier own the gun? It doesn't matter. Your position is more
important than the fact that you own it. The whole world belong to you if it
move as you want it to.

So the ONE move forward by helping the whole system to move forward. He help
the system without awareness. So the strategy of the ONE is "Do Nothing". "Do
Nothing" means he do a lot but you are just not aware of it. You do as he
expect but you feel it is you yourselves want to do it.

So the ONE cannot be clever (in the global name space), because the others
will not be clever if he is clever. The ONE cannot be smart, because the
others will not be smart if he is smart. He initiate the task when the task is
not worthy to gain a "name", and he leave the task to the other when the other
come to take the name.

The ONE try to unify all the argument as a acceptable goal for everyone to
join. So the system will become big. If the system become big, the system will
become good, and then become the Dao itself, and you won't see the name any
more.

Laozi also said it would definitely remain some hatred when merging big
conflict. Then who should take the name of the hatred? The only choice is the
ONE. The one who bear the name of the hatred can bear the world. And the one
who bear the world, the world will rely on him. The world rely on him so he
own the most "De".

So the ONE gathers no "fortune" or "power", he gathers "De". When the system
expanded finally, he become part of the system. Everyone is "good". But nobody
is aware it is good. And nobody is aware the ONE is good. But he is just good.

This is the best status of a smart and clever Chinese looking for. The best
man do not have a good name. The best theory is non-theory. The best way to do
it is just doing it without argument (do nothing).

Some Chinese may not understand this, but some strategy is built inside their
DNA. For example, most of Chinese do not want to stay in the center of
awareness, do not want to be focus. They don't know why, they just feel bad in
that pattern.

Some foreigners told me that you Chinese have no believing. No, you are wrong.
We do believe something. But we don't force others to believe it. We believe
human being have the same requirement and we can find a way to cooperate. Just
as Laozi said, the best strategy of fighting is that we don't need to fight.
So for the war between country, we always set a general and a vice general.
The vice general is responsible for fight while the general is responsible for
peace. War is not the destination, peace is.

And again, all these are still names. When you do it, it is not just as it
looks like. But if you follow the track of Dao, you will know you are on the
right way.

.. vim: tw=78 fo+=mM
